[doc] Enhance Using partition mode on UP2 tutorial (#1836)
projectacrn/acrn-hypervisor: doc/tutorials/using_partition_mode_on_up2.rst

`UP2 <https://up-board.org/upsquared/specifications/>`_ boards running two
privileged VMs as shown in below figure.

.. figure:: images/partition_mode_up2.png
   :align: center
   
   Two privileged VMs running in partition mode

Prerequisites
*************

In this tutorial two Linux privileged VMs are started by the ACRN hypervisor.
To set up the Linux root filesystems for each VM, follow the Clear Linux
`bare metal installation guide <https://clearlinux.org/documentation/clear-linux/get-started/bare-metal-install#bare-metal-install>`_
to install Clear Linux on a **SATA disk** and a **USB flash disk** prior the setup,
as the two privileged VMs will mount the root filesystems via the SATA controller
and the USB controller respectively.

Build kernel and modules for partition mode UOS
***********************************************

#. On your development workstation, clone the ACRN kernel source tree, and
   build the Linux kernel image that will be used to boot the privileged VMs:

   .. code-block:: none
     :emphasize-lines: 1,5,7,13,14

     $ git clone https://github.com/projectacrn/acrn-kernel.git
     Cloning into 'acrn-kernel'...
     ...

>      $ cd acrn-kernel

Reviewer: Can you add a tag/commit ID that is known to work?

Author: A footnote added which specifies the commits of acrn-kernel and acrn-hypervisor were validated.

         Latency: 0
         Interrupt: pin A routed to IRQ 123
         Region 0: Memory at 91514000 (32-bit, non-prefetchable) [size=8K]
         Region 1: Memory at 91537000 (32-bit, non-prefetchable) [size=256]
         Region 2: I/O ports at f090 [size=8]
         Region 3: I/O ports at f080 [size=4]
         Region 4: I/O ports at f060 [size=32]
         Region 5: Memory at 91536000 (32-bit, non-prefetchable) [size=2K]
     ...
     00:15.0 USB controller: Intel Corporation Device 5aa8 (rev 0b) (prog-if 30 [XHCI])
         Subsystem: Intel Corporation Device 7270
         Control: I/O- Mem+ BusMaster+ SpecCycle- MemWINV- VGASnoop- ParErr- Stepping- SERR- FastB2B- DisINTx+
         Status: Cap+ 66MHz- UDF- FastB2B+ ParErr- DEVSEL=medium >TAbort- <TAbort- <MAbort- >SERR- <PERR- INTx-
         Latency: 0
         Interrupt: pin A routed to IRQ 122
         Region 0: Memory at 91500000 (64-bit, non-prefetchable) [size=64K]

#. Clone the ACRN source code and configure the build options with
   ``make menuconfig`` command:

   .. code-block:: none
     :emphasize-lines: 1,3

     $ git clone https://github.com/projectacrn/acrn-hypervisor.git

>      $ cd acrn-hypervisor/hypervisor

Reviewer: Can you add a known-good tag/commit ID as a reference?

                .size = 0x800UL,
                .type = PCIBAR_MEM32
              },
           }
           ...
           static struct vpci_vdev_array vpci_vdev_array2 = {
              .num_pci_vdev = 3,
              ...
              {/*vdev 1: USB controller*/
                 .vbdf.bits = {.b = 0x00U, .d = 0x01U, .f = 0x0U},
                 .ops = &pci_ops_vdev_pt,
                 .bar = {
                    [0] = {
                      .base = 0UL,
                      .size = 0x10000UL,
                      .type = PCIBAR_MEM32
                    },
                 },
                 .pdev = {
                    .bdf.bits = {.b = 0x00U, .d = 0x15U, .f = 0x0U},
                    .bar = {
                      [0] = {
                        .base = 0x91500000UL,
                        .size = 0x10000UL,
                        .type = PCIBAR_MEM64
                      },
                    }
              ...

#. Optional configure the ``.bootargs`` kernel command line arguments

   The kernel command line arguments used to boot the privileged VMs are
   also hardcoded for now. In case you plan to use your customized root

>    filesystem, you may optional edit the ``root=`` parameter specified

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   filesystem, you may optionally edit the ``root=`` parameter specified
```

   in the ``.bootargs`` field of the ``.vm_desc_array`` structure, to

>    instruct the Linux kernel mounts the right disk partition:

Reviewer: I'm assuming that using `/dev/sda3` is correct for both VMs because they each only see one disk which is then recognized as `/dev/sda`, is that correct? Maybe you can add a small note to make this more explicit?

Author: You are right, no need to change the ``.bootargs`` if both SATA and USB disks installed with Clear Linux automatic installation.

>    instruct the Linux kernel mounts the right disk partition:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   instruct the Linux kernel to mount the right disk partition:
```

Using partition mode on UP2
###########################

ACRN hypervisor supports partition mode, in which the User OS running in a

> privileged VM can bypass the ACRN hypervisor and access to the isolated

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
privileged VM can bypass the ACRN hypervisor and directly access isolated
```

PCI devices. This tutorial provides step by step instructions on how to set up
the ACRN hypervisor partition mode on
`UP2 <https://up-board.org/upsquared/specifications/>`_ boards running two

> privileged VMs as shown in below figure.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
privileged VMs as shown in :numref:`two-priv-vms`:
```

.. figure:: images/partition_mode_up2.png
   :align: center

>    

Reviewer 2: Add a line after the ``:align:`` parameter:
```
   :name:`two-priv-vms`
```

   Two privileged VMs running in partition mode

Prerequisites
*************

In this tutorial two Linux privileged VMs are started by the ACRN hypervisor.
To set up the Linux root filesystems for each VM, follow the Clear Linux
`bare metal installation guide <https://clearlinux.org/documentation/clear-linux/get-started/bare-metal-install#bare-metal-install>`_
to install Clear Linux on a **SATA disk** and a **USB flash disk** prior the setup,
as the two privileged VMs will mount the root filesystems via the SATA controller
and the USB controller respectively.

Build kernel and modules for partition mode UOS
***********************************************

#. On your development workstation, clone the ACRN kernel source tree [1]_, and
   build the Linux kernel image that will be used to boot the privileged VMs:

   .. code-block:: none

>      :emphasize-lines: 1,5,7,13,14

Reviewer 2: Why are these lines emphasized (if it's all the commands, you missed line 4).  I'd recommend not using emphasis.

>      $ git clone https://github.com/projectacrn/acrn-kernel.git

Reviewer 2: This clone command gets you the master branch, but your (very subtle) footnote says to use a particular commit ID. If you intend to have folks NOT use the master branch's code, put that information here and in a more visible way.  What commands should a user use to get the commit ID code you've tested?

     Cloning into 'acrn-kernel'...
     ...
     $ cd acrn-kernel
     $ cp kernel_config_uos .config
     
     $ make olddefconfig
     scripts/kconfig/conf  --olddefconfig Kconfig
     #
     # configuration written to .config
     #

     $ make
     $ make modules_install INSTALL_MOD_PATH=out/

   The last two commands built the bootable kernel image ``arch/x86/boot/bzImage``,
   and the loadable kernel modules under the ``./out/`` folder. Copy these files

>    to any removable disk for being installed on the UP2 board later.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   to a removable disk for installing on the UP2 board later.
```

#. Current ACRN partition mode implementation requires a multi-boot capable
   bootloader to boot both ACRN hypervisor and the bootable kernel image
   built from the previous step. You could install Ubuntu OS to the UP2 board
   by following

>    `this tutorial <https://tutorials.ubuntu.com/tutorial/tutorial-install-ubuntu-desktop>`_,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   `this Ubuntu tutorial <https://tutorials.ubuntu.com/tutorial/tutorial-install-ubuntu-desktop>`_.
```

>    the Ubuntu installer creates 3 disk partitions on the on-board eMMC memory

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   The Ubuntu installer creates 3 disk partitions on the on-board eMMC memory.
```

>    by default, the GRUB bootloader is installed on the ESP (EFI System Partition)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   By default, the GRUB bootloader is installed on the ESP (EFI System Partition)
```

   partition, which will be used to bootstrap the partiton mode ACRN hypervisor.

#. After installing the Ubuntu OS, power off the UP2 board, attach the SATA disk
   and the USB flash disk to the board. Power on the board and make sure 
   it boots the Ubuntu OS from the eMMC, then copy the loadable kernel modules

>    built in Step 1 to the ``/lib/modules/`` folder on both mounted SATA

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   built in Step 1 to the ``/lib/modules/`` folder on both the mounted SATA
```

   disk and USB disk. For example, assuming the SATA disk and USB flash disk
   are assigned to ``/dev/sda`` and ``/dev/sdb`` respectively, the following
   commands set up the partition mode loadable kernel modules onto the root
   filesystems to be loaded by the privileged VMs:

   .. code-block:: none

>      :emphasize-lines: 2,3

Reviewer 2: Why are just these two lines emphasized?  I'd remove the line emphasis.

     # Mount the Clear Linux root filesystem on the SATA disk
     $ sudo mount /dev/sda3 /mnt
     $ sudo cp -r <kernel-modules-folder-built-in-step1>/lib/modules/* /mnt/lib/modules
     $ sudo umount /mnt
     
     # Mount the Clear Linux root filesystem on the USB flash disk
     $ sudo mount /dev/sdb3 /mnt
     $ sudo cp -r <path-to-kernel-module-folder-built-in-step1>/lib/modules/* /mnt/lib/modules
     $ sudo umount /mnt

#. Copy the bootable kernel image to the ``/boot`` directory:

   .. code-block:: none

     $ sudo cp <path-to-kernel-image-built-in-step1>/bzImage /boot/

Enable partition mode in ACRN hypervisor
****************************************

#. Before building the ACRN hypervisor, you need to figure out the I/O address
   of the serial port, and the PCI BAR addresses of the SATA controller and
   the USB controller on your UP2 board.

   Enter the following command to get the I/O addresses of the serial ports.

>    UP2 boards support two serial ports, the addresses from the command

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   UP2 boards support two serial ports. The addresses from the command
```

   output represent the I/O addresses of the serial port of the 10-pin side
   connector and the 40-pin expansion header respectively. You will need to
   connect the serial port to the development host, in order to access
   the ACRN serial console to switch between privileged VMs.

   .. code-block:: none
     :emphasize-lines: 1

     $ dmesg | grep ttyS
     [   10.552369] dw-apb-uart.8: ttyS4 at MMIO 0x91524000 (irq = 4, base_baud = 115200) is a 16550A
     [   10.552568] serial serial0: tty port ttyS4 registered
     [   10.572344] dw-apb-uart.9: ttyS5 at MMIO 0x91522000 (irq = 5, base_baud = 115200) is a 16550A
     [   10.572545] serial serial1: tty port ttyS5 registered

   The following command prints detailed information about all PCI buses
   and devices in the system. Look up the PCI BAR addresses of the SATA

>    controller and the USB controller, record down these addresses for

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   controller and the USB controller, record these addresses (highlighted below) for
```

         Status: Cap+ 66MHz+ UDF- FastB2B+ ParErr- DEVSEL=medium >TAbort- <TAbort- <MAbort- >SERR- <PERR- INTx-
         Latency: 0
         Interrupt: pin A routed to IRQ 123
         Region 0: Memory at 91514000 (32-bit, non-prefetchable) [size=8K]
         Region 1: Memory at 91537000 (32-bit, non-prefetchable) [size=256]
         Region 2: I/O ports at f090 [size=8]
         Region 3: I/O ports at f080 [size=4]
         Region 4: I/O ports at f060 [size=32]
         Region 5: Memory at 91536000 (32-bit, non-prefetchable) [size=2K]
     ...
     00:15.0 USB controller: Intel Corporation Device 5aa8 (rev 0b) (prog-if 30 [XHCI])
         Subsystem: Intel Corporation Device 7270
         Control: I/O- Mem+ BusMaster+ SpecCycle- MemWINV- VGASnoop- ParErr- Stepping- SERR- FastB2B- DisINTx+
         Status: Cap+ 66MHz- UDF- FastB2B+ ParErr- DEVSEL=medium >TAbort- <TAbort- <MAbort- >SERR- <PERR- INTx-
         Latency: 0
         Interrupt: pin A routed to IRQ 122
         Region 0: Memory at 91500000 (64-bit, non-prefetchable) [size=64K]

#. Clone the ACRN source code [1]_ and configure the build options with
   ``make menuconfig`` command:

   .. code-block:: none

>      :emphasize-lines: 1,3

Reviewer 2: Why was line 2 not emphasized (I'd remove emphasis here).

>      $ git clone https://github.com/projectacrn/acrn-hypervisor.git

Reviewer 2: This clone command gets you the master branch, but your (very subtle) footnote says to use a particular commit ID. If you intend to have folks NOT use the master branch's code, put that information here and in a more visible way.  What commands should a user use to get the commit ID code you've tested?

Author: @dbkinder I'd suggest the user always use the code on master branch, rollback to our *know-to-work* commits only when there hit regressions. In case they want to try our tested commits, they can 'git checkout <commit>' after the clone command. How do you want to proceed?

     $ cd acrn-hypervisor/hypervisor
     $ make menuconfig

   Set the ``Hypervisor mode`` option to ``Partition mode``, and depending
   on the serial port you are using, enter its MMIO address to the configuration

>    menu as shown in below screenshot. Finally, save the configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   menu as shown in this screenshot. Finally, save the configuration.
```

   .. figure:: images/menuconfig-partition-mode.png
      :align: center

#. Configure the PCI device info for each VM

>    In current implementation, PCI devices that are available to the privileged VMs

Reviewer 2: Unless there's a plan to change this, I'd delete the ``In current implementation, ``

Author: It seems to me one of the developer is developing a logic to host the **board** based vm_description.c file, I'd keep this until the new logic merged to the repo.

Author: I've verified the commit #1861, the path to ``vm_description.c`` has been updated. Remove ``In current implementation,`` per your comment.

   are hardcoded in the source file ``hypervisor/partition/vm_description.c``.

>    You need to review and modify the ``vpci_vdev_arrary1`` and ``vpci_vdev_arrary2``

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   You need to review and modify the ``vpci_vdev_array1`` and ``vpci_vdev_array2``
```

   structures in the source code to match the PCI BAR addresses of the SATA

>    controller and the USB controller noted in the Step 1:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   controller and the USB controller noted in step 1:
```

              },
              [1] = {
                .base = 0x91537000UL,
                .size = 0x100UL,
                .type = PCIBAR_MEM32
              },
              [5] = {
                .base = 0x91536000UL,
                .size = 0x800UL,
                .type = PCIBAR_MEM32
              },
           }
           ...
           static struct vpci_vdev_array vpci_vdev_array2 = {
              .num_pci_vdev = 3,
              ...
              {/*vdev 1: USB controller*/
                 .vbdf.bits = {.b = 0x00U, .d = 0x01U, .f = 0x0U},
                 .ops = &pci_ops_vdev_pt,
                 .bar = {
                    [0] = {
                      .base = 0UL,
                      .size = 0x10000UL,
                      .type = PCIBAR_MEM32
                    },
                 },
                 .pdev = {
                    .bdf.bits = {.b = 0x00U, .d = 0x15U, .f = 0x0U},
                    .bar = {
                      [0] = {
                        .base = 0x91500000UL,
                        .size = 0x10000UL,
                        .type = PCIBAR_MEM64
                      },
                    }
              ...

> #. Optional configure the ``.bootargs`` kernel command line arguments

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#. Optionally, configure the ``.bootargs`` kernel command line arguments.
```

   The kernel command line arguments used to boot the privileged VMs are
   hardcoded as ``/dev/sda3`` to meet the Clear Linux automatic installation.
   In case you plan to use your customized root
   filesystem, you may optionally edit the ``root=`` parameter specified
   in the ``.bootargs`` field of the ``.vm_desc_array`` structure, to
   instruct the Linux kernel to mount the right disk partition:
   
   .. code-block:: none
     :emphasize-lines: 6,9-11,17,20-22
     :caption: hypervisor/partition/vm_description.c

     ...
     /* Virtual Machine descriptions */
     .vm_desc_array = {
        {
           /* Internal variable, MUSTBE init to -1 */

>            .vm_hw_num_cores = VM1_NUM_CPUS,

Reviewer 2: Why is this line (6) emphasized?  There's no explanation in the text?

           .vm_pcpu_ids = &VM1_CPUS[0],
           ...
           .bootargs = "root=/dev/sda3 rw rootwait noxsave maxcpus=2 nohpet console=hvc0 \
                        console=ttyS2 no_timer_check ignore_loglevel log_buf_len=16M \
                        consoleblank=0 tsc=reliable xapic_phys",
           .vpci_vdev_array = &vpci_vdev_array1,
           .mptable = &mptable_vm1,
        },
        {
           /* Internal variable, MUSTBE init to -1 */

>            .vm_hw_num_cores = VM2_NUM_CPUS,

Reviewer 2: same question, why is this line (17) emphasized with no explanation?

           .vm_pcpu_ids = &VM2_CPUS[0],
           ...
           .bootargs = "root=/dev/sda3 rw rootwait noxsave maxcpus=2 nohpet console=hvc0 \
                        console=ttyS2 no_timer_check ignore_loglevel log_buf_len=16M \
                        consoleblank=0 tsc=reliable xapic_phys",
           .vpci_vdev_array = &vpci_vdev_array2,
           .mptable = &mptable_vm2,
           .lapic_pt = true,
        },
     }

#. Build the ACRN hypervisor and copy the artifact ``acrn.32.out`` to the
   ``/boot`` directory:

   .. code-block:: none

>      :emphasize-lines: 1,3

Reviewer 2: no need to emphasize these lines

             insmod ext2

             echo 'Loading partition mode hypervisor ...'
             multiboot /boot/acrn.32.out
             module /boot/bzImage
     }

>    Modify the /etc/default/grub file as follows to make the GRUB menu visible

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Modify the ``/etc/default/grub`` file as follows to make the GRUB menu visible
```

   when booting:

   .. code-block:: none

     #GRUB_HIDDEN_TIMEOUT=0
     GRUB_HIDDEN_TIMEOUT_QUIET=false

   Re-generate the GRUB configuration file and reboot the UP2 board. Select
   the ``ACRN Partition Mode`` entry to boot the partition mode of the ACRN
   hypervisor, the hypervisor will start the privileged VMs automatically.

   .. code-block:: none

     $ sudo update-grub

   .. code-block:: console
     :emphasize-lines: 4

      Ubuntu
      Advanced options for Ubuntu
      System setup
     *ACRN Partition Mode

Switch between privileged VMs
*****************************

Connect the serial port on the UP2 board to the development workstation.
If you set the MMIO address of the serial port right while building the
ACRN hypervisor, you should see the output from the ACRN serial console as below.
You could then log in to the privileged VMs by ``sos_console`` command,

> and press CTRL-Space keys to return to the ACRN serial console.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and press :kbd:`CTRL+Space` to return to the ACRN serial console.
```

  00:01.0 SATA controller: Intel Corporation Celeron N3350/Pentium N4200/Atom E3900 Series SATA AHCI Controller (rev 0b)
  root@clr-932c8a3012ec4dc6af53790b7afbf6ba ~ # 

   ---Entering ACRN SHELL---
  ACRN:\>sos_console 2

  ----- Entering Guest 2 Shell -----
  [    1.490122] usb 1-4: new full-speed USB device number 2 using xhci_hcd
  [    1.621311] usb 1-4: not running at top speed; connect to a high speed hub
  [    1.627824] usb 1-4: New USB device found, idVendor=058f, idProduct=6387, bcdDevice= 1.01
  [    1.628438] usb 1-4: New USB device strings: Mfr=1, Product=2, SerialNumber=3
  ...
  clr-2e8082cd4fc24d57a3c2d3db43368d36 login: root
  Password: 
  root@clr-2e8082cd4fc24d57a3c2d3db43368d36 ~ # lspci
  00:00.0 Host bridge: Intel Corporation Celeron N3350/Pentium N4200/Atom E3900 Series Host Bridge (rev 0b)
  00:01.0 USB controller: Intel Corporation Celeron N3350/Pentium N4200/Atom E3900 Series USB xHCI (rev 0b)
  00:02.0 Ethernet controller: Realtek Semiconductor Co., Ltd. RTL8111/8168/8411 PCI Express Gigabit Ethernet Controller (rev 0c)
  root@clr-2e8082cd4fc24d57a3c2d3db43368d36 ~ #

> .. [1] At the time of writing, the ACRN kernel source at the commit ``afc22d8``,

Reviewer 2: If these commit IDs are very important to know (e.g., the current master branch might not work), this footnote should be shown as a ``.. note::`` directive much earlier in the doc.

Author: @dbkinder In theory, commits after these points should work unless there is a regression. I think these commits are just known-to-work points, they are valuable only when the user hit the regression. How do you want to position it?

Reviewer 2: If the master branch should work, given your comment, I'd leave off the footnote talking about the commit IDs. If a problem shows up, it's a bug and there's no reason for a developer to go to a previous commit (and lose whatever good things happened after that).

Author: Can't agree you more. Will remove the footnote and references to it.
